Add syntax for foreign and primary keys (#23)
kg-construct/rml-lv: spec/section/annotations.md

## Structural Annotations {#annotations}

> A [=field=] (`rml:field`) contains zero or more [=structural annotations=].

Reviewer: I suggest: ... MAY contain one or more ...

> <dfn>Structural annotations</dfn> give additional information about the [=field=] (`rml:field`) and its relation to the structure of its [=logical view=] (`rml:LogicalView`).

Reviewer: @tirrolo Can you also update the shape and ontology files, and describe the general structure for a structural annotation in the spec?

Author: I began working on that this morning.

> Following [=structural annotations=] MAY be defined:

Reviewer: Here we can add immediately the rml terminology for those annotations, e.g. 
- foreign key (`rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation`)
- primary key (`rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotatation`) (i.e. unique and not null) etc.

## Structural Annotations {#annotations}

<dfn>Structural annotations</dfn> provide a mechanism to express relationships between logical views, as well as additional information about fields.

Each [=logical view=] MAY have zero or more [=structural annotation=] properties (`rml:structuralAnnotation`), connecting the logical view to a structural annotation object (i.e., of type `rml:StructuralAnnotation`).

| Property                | Domain                | Range               |
|-------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
| `rml:structuralAnnotation`     | `rml:LogicalView` | `rml:StructuralAnnotation` |

Following [=structural annotations=] MAY be defined:

> - [=Unique=] (`rml:UniqueAnnotation`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [=Unique annotation=] (`rml:UniqueAnnotation`)
```

> - [=ForeignKey=] (`rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [=ForeignKey annotation=] (`rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation`)
```

- [=NotNull=] (`rml:NotNullAnnotation`)

> - [=IriSafe=] (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [=IriSafe annotation=] (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`)
```

> - [=PrimaryKey=] (`rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [=PrimaryKey annotation=] (`rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation`)
```

> - [=Inclusion=](`rml:InclusionAnnotation`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [=Inclusion=] (`rml:InclusionAnnotation`)
```

> - [=Inclusion=] (`rml:InclusionAnnotation`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [=Inclusion annotation=] (`rml:InclusionAnnotation`)
```

### Invariance Principle

Structural annotations provide additional information about the data that might be used by the RML processor to optimize the KG construction process. If this additional information is incorrect, then the RML processor might either fail or produce wrong results. When using structural annotations, users should make sure that the following invariance principle is satisfied:

<i>For any source instances, the RDF graph produced by the RML engine over an RML file with annotations, and the same file where annotations have been removed, MUST be the same.</i>

We emphasize that RML engines might exploit structural annotations, as they could totally ignore them. It is responsibility of the user to make sure that the annotations provided are indeed correct (that is, the data complies with the annotations). Sanity checks MAY be provided by the RML engines themselves, but this is not mandatory. Note that providing wrong annotations to an engine that takes into account for annotations, for instance for applying optimizations, could result in a violation of the invariance principle, with unpredictable results.

### IriSafe

> An <dfn>IriSafe</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`) [=on fields=] _F_ indicates that the content of each field in _F_ is [IRI safe](https://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml/#dfn-iri-safe), that is, each field in _F_ does not contain any character that is not in the [`iunreserved` production](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987#section-2.2) in [RFC3987](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An <dfn data-lt="IriSafe annotation">IriSafe structural annotation</dfn> (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`) [=on fields=] _F_ indicates that the content of each field in _F_ is [IRI safe](https://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml/#dfn-iri-safe), that is, each field in _F_ does not contain any character that is not in the [`iunreserved` production](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987#section-2.2) in [RFC3987](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987).
```

### PrimaryKey

> A <dfn>PrimaryKey</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation`) [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_  imposes two conditions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A <dfn data-lt="PrimaryKey annotation">PrimaryKey structural annotation</dfn>  (`rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation`) [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_  imposes two conditions:
```

- no duplicate record sequences are present over the list of fields _(f1, ..., fn)_;
- No `NULL` value is admitted in any of the field _f1, ..., fn_.

> Each [=logical view=] MAY specify AT MOST ONE [=PrimaryKey=] annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each [=logical view=] MAY specify AT MOST ONE [=PrimaryKey annotation=].
```

We can exploit the mechanism of structural annotations to inform the RML engine about the existence of such "relational-like" constraint. We here work-out an example.

First, we specify the logical source corresponding to the CSV:

<aside class=ex-mapping>

```turtle
:csvSource a rml:logicalSource ;
  rml:source :csvFile ;
  rml:referenceFormulation rml:CSV .
```
</aside>

We are now ready to specify our logical view and associated `rml:primaryKeyAnnotation`.

<aside class=ex-mapping>

```turtle
:csvSource a rml:LogicalView ;
  rml:onLogicalSource :csvSource ;
  rml:field [
    rml:fieldName "name";
    rml:reference "name"
 ];
 rml:field [
    rml:fieldName "birthday";
    rml:reference "birthday"
 ];
 rml:structuralAnnotation [
    a rml:primaryKeyAnnotation;
    rml:onFields ("name")
 ].
```
</aside>
</aside>

### Unique

The <dfn>Unique</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:UniqueAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>UNIQUE constraints</i> in databases. Specifically, a [=Unique=] annotation [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_  imposes the following condition:

- no duplicate record sequences are present over the list of fields _(f1, ..., fn)_.

> Note that every [=PrimaryKey=] annotation is, as a matter of fact, also a [=Unique=] annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that every [=PrimaryKey annotation=] is, as a matter of fact, also a [=Unique annotation=].
```

### NotNull

The <dfn>NotNull</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:NotNullAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>NOT NULL constraints</i> in databases. Specifically, a [=NotNull=] annotation [=on fields=]  _F_  imposes that each field in _F_ does not contain NULL values.

<aside class="note">
Note that every [=PrimaryKey=] annotation is, as a matter of fact, also a [=NotNull=] annotation.
</aside>

### ForeignKey

> The <dfn>ForeignKey annotation</dfn> (`rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>foreign key constraint</i> in databases. Specifically, a [=ForeignKey=] annotation [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_ , [=target view=] <i>lv</i>, and [=target fields=] _(tf1,...,tfn)_ imposes the following conditions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <dfn>ForeignKey</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>foreign key constraint</i> in databases. Specifically, a [=ForeignKey=] annotation [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_ , [=target view=] <i>lv</i>, and [=target fields=] _(tf1,...,tfn)_ imposes the following conditions:
```

## Structural Annotations {#annotations}

> <s>A [=field=] (`rml:field`) contains zero or more [=structural annotations=].</s>

Author: Ok!

<aside class="issue">
Davide Lanti:

I have a problem with definition above. While for certain annotations this might work (e.g., iriSafe and notNullable), for annotations possibly spanning across multiple fields (e.g., foreignKey and primaryKey) this won't suffice.

My proposals:

1) SQL way, having both variants: annotations for fields AND annotations for logical views;
2) only having annotations at the level of the logical view

> In the remainder of this section, I try pursuing 1.

Reviewer: I am in favor of option 2

Author: Ok. That is in fact how I wrote the section, in the end.

</aside>

<s>Structural annotations give additional information about fields [=field=] (`rml:field`) and their relations to the structure of their [=Logical View=] (`rml:LogicalView`).</s>

<aside class="issue">
Davide Lanti: The sentence above is a bit reductive. I have included it into the paragraph below.
</aside>

> Logical views provide a way of organizing (and, sometimes, flatten) data from the sources into a relational format. Therefore, there is a natural correspondence between logical views and relational databases. This natural correspondence allows us exploit, when writing mappings, standard operations from the relational world like [=inner join=] (`rml:innerJoin`) and [=left join=] (`rml:leftJoin`).

Reviewer: I would say 'a tabular format' rather than a 'relational format'

Author: Ok.

One could think of inheriting not only operations, but also the ability to specify properties of fields (e.g., uniqueness) as well as relationships across logical views (e.g., inclusion dependencies). This ability would be useful in a number of scenarios, and particularly in the virtual one, where <i>integrity constraints</i> are essentially a requirement.

> <dfn>Structural annotations</dfn> provide a mechanism to express relationships between logical views, as well as additional information about fields.

Author: I am unsure, I still like the idea of having a short introduction of the section before jumping to the definition of structural annotation itself.

Each [=logical view=] MAY have zero or more [=structural annotation=] properties (`rml:structuralAnnotation`), connecting the logical view to a structural annotation object (i.e., of type `rml:StructuralAnnotation`).

| Property                | Domain                | Range               |
|-------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
| `rml:structuralAnnotation`     | `rml:LogicalView` | `rml:StructuralAnnotation` |

Following [=structural annotations=] MAY be defined:
- [=Unique=] (`rml:UniqueAnnotation`)
- [=ForeignKey=] (`rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation`)
- [=NotNull=] (`rml:NotNullAnnotation`)
- OtherFunctionalDependency
- [=IriSafe=] (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`)
- (datatype also?)
- [=PrimaryKey=] (`rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation`)
- [=Inclusion=]

> Intuitively, semantics for the annotations above is the same as for relational databases.

Author: Ok.

All structural annotations of a logical view <i>lv</i> MUST have an <dfn>on fields</dfn> property (`rml:onFields`), linking the structural annotation to a list of field names occurring in <i>lv</i>. Intuitively, property [=on fields=] specifies the fields in <i>lv</i> that are involved by the structural annotation. The semantics of this involvement depends on the specific annotation.

| Property                | Domain                | Range               |
|-------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|

> | `rml:onFields`             | `rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation` | `rdf:List` |

Author: Order is important for foreign keys and inclusions. Since I am using a single "onFields" property for specifying fields involved by the structural annotation, I am always (that is, also for primary keys) using lists for consistency. I do not see a way of avoiding using lists for foreign keys or inclusions, because we **must** impose a correspondence between a non-fixed number of values.

> | `rml:onFields`             | `rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation` | `rdf:List` |

Reviewer: An alternative could be to first concatenate all field needed to form a primary key or foreign key in one new field using a rml:template. And then refer to this new field as a primary or foreign key. Not sure if this is better than using rdf:List. I have no experience yet with rdf:List.

### Invariance Principle

Differently from integrity constraints in databases, structural annotations are intended to be <i>annotations</i>. That is, the following invariant principle should be satisfied:

> <i>For any source instances, the RDF graph produced by the RML engine over an RML file with annotations, and the same file where annotations have been removed, MUST be the same.</i>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<i>For any source instances, the RDF graph produced by the RML engine using an <a data-cite="RML-Core#dfn-rml-mapping">RML mapping</a> with annotations, and the same  <a data-cite="RML-Core#dfn-rml-mapping">RML mapping</a> where annotations have been removed, MUST be the same.</i>
```

> RML engines might exploit structural annotations, as they could totally ignore them. It is responsibility of the user to make sure that the annotations provided are indeed correct. Sanity checks MAY be provided by the RML engines themselves, but this is not mandatory. Note that providing wrong annotations to an engine that takes into account for annotations, for instance for applying optimizations, could result in a violation of the invariance principle, with unpredictable results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RML engines MAY exploit structural annotations, or they MAY totally ignore them. It is the responsibility of the user to make sure that the annotations provided are indeed correct. Sanity checks MAY be provided by the RML engines themselves, but this is not mandatory. Note that providing wrong annotations to an annotation supporting engine, for instance for applying optimizations, could result in a violation of the invariance principle, with unpredictable results.
```

### IriSafe

> An <dfn>IriSafe</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`) [=on fields=] _F_ indicates that the content of each field in _F_ is [IRI safe](https://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml/#dfn-iri-safe), that is, each field in _F_ does not contain any character that is not in the [`iunreserved` production](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987#section-2.2) in [RFC3987](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An <dfn>IriSafe structural annotation</dfn> (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`) [=on fields=] _F_ indicates that the content of each field in _F_ is [IRI safe](https://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml/#dfn-iri-safe), that is, each field in _F_ does not contain any character that is not in the [`iunreserved` production](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987#section-2.2) in [RFC3987](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987).
```

> An <dfn>IriSafe</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`) [=on fields=] _F_ indicates that the content of each field in _F_ is [IRI safe](https://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml/#dfn-iri-safe), that is, each field in _F_ does not contain any character that is not in the [`iunreserved` production](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987#section-2.2) in [RFC3987](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An <dfn>IriSafe</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:IriSafeAnnotation`) [=on fields=] _F_ indicates that the content of each field in _F_ is <a data-cite="RML-Core#dfn-iri-safe">IRI safe</a>.
```
IMO better to only refer to definition in core and not repeat it here.

### PrimaryKey

> The <dfn>PrimaryKey</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of primary key for databases. Specifically, a [=PrimaryKey=] annotation [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_  imposes two conditions:

Reviewer: I would skip the sentence referring to databases: 
A [=PrimaryKey=] annotation [=on fields=] _(f1, ..., fn)_ imposes two conditions:

Author: Ok, removed.

```
</aside>

We are now ready to specify our logical view and associated `rml:primaryKeyAnnotation`.

<aside class=ex-mapping>

```turtle
:csvSource a rml:LogicalView ;
  rml:onLogicalSource :csvSource ;
  rml:field [
    rml:fieldName "name";
    rml:reference "name"
 ];
 rml:field [
    rml:fieldName "birthday";
    rml:reference "birthday"
 ];
 rml:structuralAnnotation [
    a rml:primaryKeyAnnotation;
    rml:onFields ("name")
 ].
```
</aside>
</aside>

### Unique

The <dfn>Unique</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:UniqueAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>UNIQUE constraints</i> in databases. Specifically, a [=Unique=] annotation [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_  imposes the following condition:

- no duplicate record sequences are present over the list of fields _(f1, ..., fn)_.

Note that every [=PrimaryKey=] annotation is, as a matter of fact, also a [=Unique=] annotation.

### NotNull

The <dfn>NotNull</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:NotNullAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>NOT NULL constraints</i> in databases. Specifically, a [=NotNull=] annotation [=on fields=]  _F_  imposes that each field in _F_ does not contain NULL values.

> Note that every [=PrimaryKey=] annotation is, as a matter of fact, also a [=NotNull=] annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that every [=PrimaryKey annotation=] is, as a matter of fact, also a [=NotNull annotation=].
```

### ForeignKey

The <dfn>ForeignKey</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>foreign key constraint</i> in databases. Specifically, a [=ForeignKey=] annotation [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_ , [=target view=] <i>lv</i>, and [=target fields=] _(tf1,...,tfn)_ imposes the following conditions:

- each NULL-free record sequence over the list of fields _(f1, ..., fn)_ occurs also as a record sequence in _(tf1,...,tfn)_;
- Target view <i>lv</i> defines a [=Unique=] annotation [=on fields=] _(tf1,...,tfn)_.

The <def>target view</def> is a [=logical view=] specified through the property `rml:targetView`, whereas the <def>target fields</def> are an RDF list of field names specified through the property `rml:targetFields`. These two properties are specified as follows:

| Property                | Domain                | Range               |
|-------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
| `rml:targetView`     | `rml:InclusionAnnotation`| `rml:LogicalView` |

> | `rml:targetFields`     | `rml:InclusionAnnotation`| `rdf:List` |

Author: Yes, unfortunately order is crucial.

(A,B) -> (C,D) is different than saying (B,A) -> (C,D), where "->" is "foreign key".

> | `rml:targetFields`     | `rml:InclusionAnnotation`| `rdf:List` |

Reviewer: An alternative could be to first concatenate all field needed to in one new field using a rml:template. And then refer to this new field:  `rml:field [ rml:fieldName 'AB'; rml:template "{A}-{B}"]`. Not sure if this is better than using rdf:list.

<aside class=ex-mapping>

```turtle
:csvSource a rml:LogicalView ;
  rml:onLogicalSource :csvSource ;
  rml:field [
    rml:fieldName "name";
    rml:reference "name"
 ];
 rml:field [
    rml:fieldName "birthday";
    rml:reference "birthday"
 ];
 rml:structuralAnnotation [
    a rml:PrimaryKeyAnnotation;
    rml:onFields ("name");
 ].
```
</aside>

Now, we declare the logical view corresponding to `:jsonSource`. Note that this view contains a `rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation`:

<aside class=ex-mapping>

```turtle
:jsonView a rml:LogicalView ;
  rml:onLogicalSource :jsonSource ;
  rml:field [
    rml:fieldName "name" ;
    rml:reference "$.name" ;
  ] ;
  rml:field [
    rml:fieldName "item" ;
    rml:reference "$.items[*]" ;
    rml:field [
      rml:fieldName "type" ;
      rml:reference "$.type" ;
    ] ;
    rml:field [
      rml:fieldName "weight" ;
      rml:reference "$.weight" ;
    ]
  ] ;
  rml:structuralAnnotation [
    a rml:ForeignKeyAnnotation;
    rml:onFields ("name");
    rml:targetView :csvView;
    rml:targetFields ("name")
  ].
```
</aside>
</aside>

### Inclusion

> The <dfn>Inclusion</dfn> structural annotation (`rml:InclusionAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>inclusion dependency</i> in databases. Specifically, an [=Inclusion=] annotation [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_ , [=target view=] <i>lv</i>, and [=target fields=] _(tf1,...,tfn)_ imposes the following condition:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The <dfn data-lt="Inclusion annotation">Inclusion structural annotation</dfn> (`rml:InclusionAnnotation`) is analogous to the notion of <i>inclusion dependency</i> in databases. Specifically, an [=Inclusion annotation=] [=on fields=]  _(f1, ..., fn)_ , [=target view=] <i>lv</i>, and [=target fields=] _(tf1,...,tfn)_ imposes the following condition:
```

Author: Suggestion incorporated.

- each NULL-free record sequence over the list of fields _(f1, ..., fn)_ occurs also as a record sequence in _(tf1,...,tfn)_;

> Note that every [=Foreignkey=] annotation is also an [=Inclusion=] annotation.

Reviewer 2: Could be an `aside` of class note
